[Music]
Okay, I think we'll get started um so we
can have time to get through all of
Michael's material tonight on it in a
timely manner. Um, for all of you who
have been here before, you know Michael
Scott. He's running a five session
series on startup secrets, how to give
yourself an unfair competitive
advantage. Tonight's discussion is going
to be around business model analysis.
And I know he's brought a number of his
portfolio companies to present as well.
Um, so it's going to be a lively
session. I'm really looking forward to
it. Um, without further ado, I'm going
to hand you over to Michael and his team
of people.
Well, welcome everybody. We should have
a lot of fun this evening. We're going
to talk about one as as Jody says of the
multiple things that we put on the
original topic and that being business
model. For those of you who've been at
the other sessions, this will feel like
it's in context. For those of you who
haven't been, I just want to get a show
of hands who's new here. Therefore, I
can try to cover some of the background.
Okay. Quite a number of new people
actually. Okay. Okay, so I will tell you
this right before I get going in which
case the value proposition session which
is up on the website
contracapist.com provides the background
to what is it that you do and how do you
do it uniquely well for who that's the
simplification of a very long one hour
monologue by me. Uh so there you go. You
skipped the one hour. You've got the the
essence of it. And based on the value
proposition, the business model is all
about figuring out how you take that to
market as a viable financial sales
marketing and uh even service and
support model. So even though you've
missed that, just think about whatever
idea it is you've got, we're going to
figure out how to build a business model
around it today. If you missed the
company formation piece, that was really
around building the team and obviously
hiring the people to make that a
successful basis to take your enterprise
u and execute and next session is very
much the other side of the coin to the
business model because business model is
so closely aligned to go to market
strategy. So that gives you a little bit
of context for those who haven't been
here. All right, first of all, I just
like to make some introductions. Uh
we've got a number of the portfolio
companies being kind enough to come in
as case studies this evening and also to
help out in the workshop. So you've got
real executives who have real day jobs,
real entrepreneurs who have real ideas
that can help you as you try to take
yours uh and figure out what your
business model is. So first of all like
to introduce the active endpoints uh two
representatives here, Mark Taber and
Eric Egson. If you just like stand up.
Mark's our CEO and Eric heads up sales.
Thank you guys for coming.
[Applause]
And then akibban we have uh David
McFarland and Oristat the CEO and
founder
[Applause]
respectively. And then from Demandware
who uh is represented by Jamus Driscoll,
I just say before he says anything
they're on the road show and so he's
basically been told not to say anything.
Say nothing. I don't exist. I was never
here.
So, unfortunately, we can't use his case
study, but he's assured me we'll use one
when they get through the road trip.
But, um, thank you for coming. He'll be
part of at least the workshop so he can
engage with you. Uh, and then I'm lucky
to have two of my partners here tonight,
too. Not quite sure why they're here
except to check that I don't say
something out of order, but uh, Jim
Moran from
[Applause]
Northridge. And then we also have
Carichel Roberts who's also brought some
special guests with him.
Car Michael. No. Okay. Well, we have I'm
going to get him right now. Don't worry.
We'll introduce him when he comes in.
He's brought another of his companies
actually because uh Jim and I mostly
work on software, but we did want to
make sure that people who are not
focused on software have a sense that
these business model techniques that
we're going to talk about tonight
actually do apply to many different
kinds of ventures. And so, in fact, he's
going to talk about one of his companies
called MCT10, which is in the material
space. Very good. So let's jump in with
our agenda. As I said, this is all about
building a business model. And I'm
particularly going to focus on just four
things. First of all, finding a
disruptive business model. You can all
go and discuss what a business model is.
You can read about it many different
ways. But if you're a startup, the
really important thing you're going to
try to do is bring disruptive innovation
into the marketplace. And that shouldn't
just be about technology. The business
model is a fundamental piece of it. But
how do you find that? Well, I'm going to
show you three key things. First of all,
finding your core differentiation. That
is absolutely critical to building a
business model. Secondly, what are the
multipliers that will help you spread
that value proposition in an effective
way getting great market share, great
reach, and ultimately great revenue. And
then third, very importantly, how do you
take the cost out of the equation uh
with levers? And levers, as you'll see,
are things that can be highly
advantageous to companies that figure
out how to use them in their business
model. And then last, I'm going to give
you a very quick insight into how that
plays out in the life cycle of working
with your customers. And particularly
important here is an example I'm going
to bring to light for you of how this
plays out in the software world, but
again, I would say it's applicable to
many different areas. I mentioned
earlier that um this is really one side
of the coin. The other side of it is go
to market. So you will feel in some
cases like I'm transgressing a little
bit into what does it take to go to
market but that's because there's clear
linkages here and then the most
important thing about tonight is of
course the workshop and we're going to
have a lot of fun with that. We've got
10 teams again tonight uh and 10 helpers
and Jody's organized for us to have the
whiteboards to see around the room so
everybody can go write their business
models up and come in and present them
and we'll have the usual voting at the
end. Excellent. Well, with that in mind,
I'm going to get the boring stuff right
out the way right away.
Everybody can go read this on the web.
There are actually some great books on
it. The basics of business models are
around creating the value. So that's
things like creating your product or
service, delivering it. That's things
like obviously how you take it to market
and then how you harness or monetize or
capture the
value. But we're here for a reason. We
want to talk about startups. And if
you're a startup, I want you to start
thinking about business models
creatively right away. Don't take
somebody else's business model as my
first piece of advice to you. There are
plenty of business models around. In
fact, it will be true to say that the
best example of business models of a
business model probably hasn't been
invented yet. And that's what I hope
we'll get from you is the next
generation of interesting business
models because this is all about how can
you make a breakthrough here. It's not
about picking somebody else's business
model and just applying it to your
situation. the chances are at that point
you're adding very little value in your
startup and you're probably not making
any major impact. So I really want you
to think about this literally as how do
you change the game? If you could come
in for example to a marketplace and
literally rewrite the rules on your own
game and cause somebody else to have an
innovator's dilemma. Imagine how
powerful that would be. I would argue
that that is at least as important as
having a disruptive technology. There
are many examples like that. What I
encourage you to do is to think about
whatever it is you're bringing to market
in those kinds of ways. Don't let
somebody else write the rules. You write
them. In fact, define the whole new game
the way that you can. So, what's an
example? I'm really going to date
myself. I put an exclamation mark here.
Um, 20 years ago, believe it or not,
there was this little company called
Semantic. It's a multi-billion dollar
company today. That's the good news. But
the bad news is at the time we were
actually a struggling company in many
ways and I would say that with uh tongue
and cheek because you know obviously
it's become very successful but I think
we had more than 20 products. We had
everything from add-ins for uh Lotus 123
if those of you remember back to that
was the first spreadsheet to uh we had
languages you know think C, think Pascal
on the Mac. Uh we had all sorts of
products. We had a database, we had a
word processor. I mean, it was just
unbelievable. And I'm particularly being
brought um uh this is all being brought
back to me right now because we're about
to have a 20-year reunion for the first
20 years of Semantic this weekend. And
all these products and so forth have
been coming to light. And so this
example just stuck in my mind and it's
really a business model example. The
product that was selling best on the
Macintosh back then was something called
Semantic Antivirus for Mac. And believe
it or not, the Mac was plagued with
viruses in those days. system 6 or 7 or
whatever it was at the time was was
really an issue and it was a very
successful product for us and we were
selling it as a licensed product. a you
know whatever it was dollars perpetual
license you bought it through uh the
time you know your local retailer and
because it was a chart topping product
you'd have said at that point great
we've got that business model nailed we
know how to produce that product package
it distribute it sell it it's the top of
the charts what should we do when we
introduce the PC
version the answer is why don't you just
copy the business model I just told you
I think that's a really bad idea and so
we also stopped and thought about Uh and
initially we got it slightly right in
that we decided it was important to
introduce the PC model with more of a
flavor of an upgrade service and an
update service because there were many
more viruses coming out for the PC. And
so in fact we were having to get people
updates initially once a quarter. Then
we realized wow it's happening sort of
once a month. Then we realized hey this
is happening regularly. It's probably
hard to believe this. At the time, there
were probably a maximum of about 100
viruses on the planet uh when this came
out. Now there are, you know, tens of
thousands and they come out very
regular. So, of course, what we did was
we flipped it all on its head. We
actually decided the software was worth
nothing because we needed to get that
out there as a platform for people to be
able to get the virus definitions
downloaded to prevent the viruses. And
so, the real value was not in the
software at all. the real value was in
having the virus definition before it
ever attacked anybody's machine. And so
that literally was the turning point if
you were to ask me personally, I think
you ask pretty much anybody at Sam at
the time on the fortunes of that company
because we suddenly created a
subscription model that was not a nice
to have. It was essential for
enterprises and they didn't care about
the software. They cared about the
person who had that virus definition
first. And suddenly we had a very
predictable business because every time
a virus came out we knew people were
going to want to download it. Therefore
we knew they were going to want the
subscription to be up to date. Therefore
we knew they were going to pay monthly.
Therefore we could see what our revenue
was going to be. And it was very very
gamechanging. So that's an example from
a product
standpoint. Any questions on that before
I go forward? So did you after that
change the Mac model? Yes. Yes we did.
Uh and in fact uh I'll give credit to
one of my sales guys here uh who was one
of the first guys who actually even
flipped the entire product line on its
head and said you know what we're
selling a bunch of things like backup
for example and Norton utilities was
another product we sold but people
really don't want to pay for the
software what they're really doing is
trying to get data security and prevent
data loss and so forth so we came up
with what he called and he really
deserves the credit for it a total
solution to data security and in the UK
for example we took full page ads in the
Financial Times and we went to an
extraordinary length to get people to
understand that what's the most
important thing to them that they're
actually producing with all this
software. It's their data. It's their
information. So, they really should put
that top in terms of creating data
protection. And suddenly, as a result of
that uh thinking, we actually started
selling a data protection service and we
bundled all of our products together in
what we called the total solution and
sales just took off. And if I would go
into it even one more level of detail
for you, I'd tell you this, which is we
used to on average sell one to one and a
half products per major enterprise per
seat. And by bundling five or six
products together, the actual natural
average of that turned out to be 2.6. So
in other words, we went from 1.5 to 2.6
the value uh just by bundling that
correctly and by taking the game up to
being a data security uh and information
protection game. extraordinarily
successful uh and my investors at the
time who were quite concerned to say the
least about us going and taking full
page ads out in in major newspapers uh
very quickly lost their concern and saw
tremendous
results. Okay, so next example this is
not a technology example. This is
absolutely a pure play business example.
At the time I was based in the UK and I
was observing that every major product
that came into the UK from a US
publisher was largely failing. Failing
because they didn't have the investment
in management, marketing, distribution,
sales, services, and support. And why?
Because if you look at the US market,
it's 10 times roughly bigger than the UK
market. So let's say you're a $10
million company in the US. You may have
some at that point relative critical
max, even $20 million going to the UK.
tenth the size and market you could be
maybe a $2 million company doesn't
really give you much room to invest in
marketing or management or distribution
or translation localization all these
other things so it was very tough for us
companies to be successful and they
typically went to just distributors and
said here we've got a great product you
know put it in distribution well
products don't sell themselves and so
without the marketing and support or
translation in some cases it was very
unsuccessful so I decided to come up
with a business model that basically
enabled us companies companies to bring
them to bring their products to us as
one entity, European Software
Publishing. And because we had multiple
products, we could get the critical mass
in all the things I just put up on the
on the management all the way through to
distribution. And as a result of that,
we were able to provide, for example,
introductions to the top uh times 100
companies. That's equivalent 41,000. And
if we'd already got that connection on
one product, when we took on another
product, it be very easy to open the
door and say, "Okay, here's the next
product." We do it very selectively. So
it wasn't like a, you know, a long
list. It was very successful financially
for the US companies, too, because we
would get these companies to about 20
to$30 million. In other words, highly
scaled, highly profitable at that point.
And then we would enable them to acquire
them back. But it was also acquired back
on a basis that there was something
called pooling of interest in those
days. But just think of it as a tax
efficient way to do it. It was
non-dilutive. So it cost them nothing in
terms of earnings per share if you will.
And it was ultimately uh acquiring
something that had growing earnings. So
the minute they acquired it, it was
adding to their top line as well as
their bottom line as therefore to their
overall stakeholder value. So it was
like incubating if you will these
companies till they got to the point
that they were successful and then
acquiring them back on this
anti-dilutive basis on this just highly
profitable basis and uh as an example
semantic itself which is one of the
companies that we brought over uh was a
huge win uh I put this picture up there
because I say it's a huge win but then
my wife always reminds me that the two
bibles that it took is that they were
huge thick things to conclude that deal
was the pain involved in it. So there
was a lot involved in doing that but the
win-win here for investors for the early
investors was a 97x on their money to
give you a sense of it. Um and yet
Semantic themselves doubled the value on
an on a accretive basis acquiring the
company. So the day after the
acquisition was acquired was announced
the company's share price went up and
also more importantly the continuing
earning streams continued to contribute
and semantic in the UK was their most
profitable uh business outside of the US
at the time. So everybody won. We we
made customers happy. We obviously made
our shareholders happy. And in the
middle of this thing, we made semantic
uh as an entity more successful. That
had nothing to do with technology.
Absolutely nothing. Although, by the
way, I was very passionate about
Semantic products and stayed on and and
continue to actually uh really enjoy
working with them. But my point is here,
this is an example of something that you
should be thinking about even if you've
got a breakthrough technology. What are
the things that will make a win-win for
you? So tonight I'm going to talk to you
about that and hopefully give you enough
examples about it. I don't think I need
to say more about this, but um I've
hopefully made it clear to you that it
is at least as important. But now I want
to give you a a specific reason why the
business model is as important as
technology. So before I give you the
answer, can anybody tell me why in
financial terms business model should be
considered as important as technology?
Any thoughts?
I've given you some examples, but can
anybody give me? Products don't sell
themselves. Sorry. Go ahead. Products
don't sell themselves. So, no matter how
good your technology doesn't matter.
Yeah, you're on exactly the right track.
Products don't sell themselves. People
don't even know about them. How are they
going to even find them even if they are
great? So, what does it cost to for
people to find out about your product?
Is that relatively the same as
developing the product? Is it more? Is
it less? Anybody?
Somebody heard saying more.
A show of hands. Who thinks it's more?
This is an easy way to Okay. Well, those
of you who said
more, you're right. The staggering thing
is how much more? It's usually double.
If you look at a software company, for
example, P&L, you'll see that on
average, companies will settle out at
around 15 to 20% of their P&L being
spent on R&D and 30 to 40%, in other
words, double on sales and marketing. So
what I'm pointing out to you here is
even if you've got a brilliant product,
how it'll end up playing out in your
business model is that double the amount
that you're spending on your product is
going to be spent just as u was
volunteered from the back there on
taking it to market. And that's what
this business model is all about. It's
about how you get multipliers and levers
to actually take the cost out and the
revenue
up. And in fact, I'll go one step
further. I will say that the perfect
startup storm by the time you finish
this session and the next session should
be very easy for you to define. It
should be a disruptive business model
with a disruptive technology and then
you obviously focusing on a new market
opportunity or target segment with an
innovative way to get it there. You get
those three things, you have my
attention. Now, I'm not saying by the
way that great companies don't get
formed with one or even two of those,
but if you have all three, you really
have the perfect startup store.
So, let's get you started on thinking
about some of these
models. Excuse me while I reattach my
mic. These models here are just a
sampling of the ones that I went to pick
up. The wonderful thing about them and
the reason I picked them is many of
these companies didn't exist, you know,
five or 10 years ago. Uh, one of the
fastest growing companies uh ever is
Groupon and they came up with a
completely new business model. Um, one
of my favorites which I used for a while
and didn't understand their business
model until I sort of thought about it
was Mint. It's not a company that's
actually trying to make money out of the
software the way Intuit did to process
your um, finances. It's actually a lead
genen business that's actually driving
lead generation to many of the financial
services providers. And in our own
portfolio, even though um Jamus can't
talk about it, Demandware has a very
innovative business model which written
in the S1 is all about revenue share.
And I could say no more than that. Uh
but it's an example of what I think I'm
making a point of here and that is every
one of these companies is at least in
part being successful because of a
disruptive business model. And we will
talk about some of these examples, but
they might be things that you've never
even thought about associated with
technology before. Such as, for example,
how do you do crowd sourcing? There's an
innovative company in Boston called
Utest that's actually taking people from
around the world to test mobile phones
uh in all the different environments
around the world. You might say, well,
why is that a big deal in a business
model? Well, think about the
alternative. There are so many different
phone types with so many different
carriers that can be used in so many
different places. There's no possible
way you could recreate an environment
that would test all the different
scenarios for mobile phones and mobile
applications. But if you crowdsource it
all around the world, you can get a real
sampling of what might be the way to
test things. So their business model
actually not only solves that problem,
but actually of course leverages lowcost
labor around the world as a lever to
help them be very effective in their
test. So, I would say any one of these
examples is one of many I could have
picked to again hopefully get you
thinking about what could you do to be
disruptive. So, what are the sample
questions I'd recommend you start with?
Well, amazingly, people come in and they
almost invariably say, "We have a
product." Yes, you may have a product,
but is it really a product or is there a
process associated with that product
being used? In which case, is the
process more valuable than the product?
Do you really only have software or do
you have to have services to actually
make this successful? In which case, is
the service more important than the
software? In open source, you will find
that the software is free. So, unless
you have services, there's no value. In
is it open or proprietary and and so on
and so forth. Here's one I'll pick out
for you, which I think is rapidly
emerging as an interesting new business
model. As we get networks of people
working around these products and
services, we're collecting tremendous
amounts of data on people. And in fact,
the best example of that is probably
going to be one of the most interesting
new IPOs this year. That's Facebook.
Facebook's value is not its software. I
mean, it's great software. It's
impressive that PHP scaled to be able to
do, you know, uh to serve hundreds of
millions of users. But that's not what
we're paying for. We're paying for
ability to connect to people. And guess
what they're monetizing? They're
monetizing the fact that we've all
connected and told them what we are
doing all day so they can figure out
what really is valuable to them. the
data behind that that enables them to
target us more effectively. So their
value is in their content or their data.
Maybe they would say simply their data.
My point being here this is an example
of where I would encourage you to
question early what is the set of values
that is at the core of your business. So
let's go to exactly that. Your first key
question should be what is your core
value? Those of you who haven't heard me
talk before, I've said this many times.
I was one of those students who needed
pneumonics to remember anything. So,
you'll find I use pneumonics everywhere.
Um, I could have said corny, but just
forgive me. This is a way that hopefully
you'll remember these things. The core
of your capabilities should be literally
what is it that you've got of really
exceptional value at the center of your
proposition that you could build around
that you could create a model around.
And when you tell me it's core, nine
times out of 10 when I'm sitting with an
entrepreneur and I really question it,
they haven't defined the core. They've
defined a bunch of stuff and when we
really press hard, we can actually get
even more focused. So I'll often hear,
oh, we've got a great software product.
Okay, let's talk about what that product
does and for who. And then when we
really get down to it, we'll find out
that a small piece of what somebody's
actually building is really the core
innovation. So uh in the case that we're
going to talk about tonight with a keep
you'll find out that they actually are
in the database business but the core of
their innovation is actually a very
critical new piece of how you process
data and they didn't need to recreate
the entire database infrastructure.
They're leveraging a lot of open source
to do
that. So let's have a look at some
examples from the ones we just talked
about. I already gave you a sense of how
to think about core uh in the example of
Facebook. their real uh innovation is
probably the user network but if you
went to the core I think it's data and
what they do with that data obviously in
in terms of using it for advertising as
a business model is really interesting
now they may change that they may decide
that at some point there are other
values but if they hadn't got that call
right early on I think it would have
been very difficult another one I think
that's that's just gone public so it's
topical would be Yelp Yelp could have
been thought about as community could
have been monetized in many different
ways but in the end the content's become
really the core of the value there.
Again, if you look at what's going on
now in uh the world of the net in
particular, a lot of times what people
are building is some form of
userenerated content around the network.
And there are many ways you can monetize
that. But I would say to you the most
important thing you should do is again
instead of just saying well how could I
monetize it and just say oh advertising
is the thing before you do that say well
who else am I competing with? And if
everybody's advertising, sorry, using
advertising in the same way as you are,
you probably don't have a competitive
advantage. So try to flip it. Try to
create an innovator's dilemma. You think
about what Christensen has has talked
about many years, which is creating some
way to do something that can't be
followed as opposed to just following
what everybody else has done. And so
when you think about monetizing your
core, think about where others are most
vulnerable of where you could do
something that again changed the game.
go back to that metaphor and rewrote the
rules and gave you some way of
monetizing that was really tough for
others to follow. I'm a huge proponent
of open source. If you haven't figured
that out, do a lot of investments in
that space. And the reason I love it is
that it's tough to compete with free,
which is really what open source is is
at its core. But it's very easy for open
source companies therefore to attack
existing marketplaces with an offering
that is delivering the same value at no
cost and focused on making the customer
successful with support because the
customer loves that and the competitor
can't compete with free. So think of
things in those ways whatever whatever
it is that you're addressing. And if
open source helps you think about it I'm
happy to talk to you more about why we
we love that as a business
model. Okay. So core is first point. Now
I'm going to introduce you to the next
two concepts multipliers and levers and
they work around your core. So these are
not you know separate to it. Once you
know what your core value is, how can
you multiply it? Meaning increase the
revenue, increase the reach of customers
you get to or increase the coverage or
market share that you get. That's really
what multipliers are all about. And I'm
going to bring these to life with some
examples in a minute. On the other side,
levers reduce the costs, reduce the
time, and reduce the resources involved
in producing your product or getting it
to market or in capturing that value.
And if you get both of these things
working for you, as the diagram
suggests, they really can create
extraordinary value on top of your
business model, the core of your value
proposition. So, what are some examples?
As you all know, my experience comes
from software.
Let me pause the question. What did you
mean by reduce resources? I thought you
need to have a lot of resources to be a
product. Great question. So the question
just so everybody heard it is what did I
mean by reducing resources when we just
said that for example taking products to
market requires a lot of resources. What
I mean is how could you reduce the
resources that are required to take it
to market. So, I'll give you a simple
example. Just I'm going to preview what
I'm about to talk about, but if you
could create viral marketing where your
user was actually selling for you,
that's obviously going to reduce your
cost. Does that make sense? So, that's
an example of a lever. And by the way,
people talk about viral marketing all
the time. It's a very tough thing to
define. There are all sorts of models
people have and coefficients they create
and everything else. I'll give you a
really example of important example of
viral
marketing. Reference selling. If you
really love something and you refer it
to somebody else, that's that's the
beginning of viral marketing right
there. So making happy customers is the
beginning of viral marketing and
figuring out how to get very happy
customer armed with the right way to
reference sell just giving them the
basics of of uh you know what what
typically is in most people which is
they want to justify the purchase
they've already made if they like it
anyway. So give them the tools to do
that and then of course you can do all
sorts of offers and things uh to promote
it. Anyway, did that answer your
question? Great. Any other questions
before I move
on? Okay. So uh for examples I as I said
I meant software so I'm going to use
these as as u talking points but I think
these apply to many different
businesses. So the first category that
we're talking about is exactly what we
just uh discussed which is sales and
marketing. It's usually such a huge part
of the P&L that if you can start to get
a multiplier working for you here, it's
very valuable. And things that make may
make a difference here are things like
tiered pricing. So in other words, if
you sell a product at one price in all
flavors, that's possibly the exactly the
right thing to do for simplicity sake.
But wouldn't it be better if you could
get people to get it free first of all?
set was literally frictionless to start
off with and then upgrade and upsell and
add value and obviously add capabilities
and so forth going forward because every
time you acquire a customer as long as
you keep them the ability to upsell is
obviously a lot less expensive than
creating a whole new customer
relationship. So I know that sounds
obvious but that's right there an
example of a multiplier and it's a
reason why tiered pricing and models
like premium can be so helpful. The
other typical multiplier you'll hear is
channels. This is definitely applicable
to almost any business. You could go out
and create a Salesforce for every
product, I'm sure. But wouldn't it be
more effective to use somebody else's
Salesforce, to use somebody who's
already got the customer relationship,
who's already written the contracts with
major uh part um uh enterprises and just
leverage those. I can tell you that's
one of the biggest challenges for
startups is that just the contracting
process alone in the Fortune 1000 is
horrifying. I'm seeing a few smiles at
the front here because we constantly sit
in boardrooms with you know the forecast
and we know that the the deal is closed
but the contract is still to come and
we're like okay is it EMC we're dealing
with or is it HP and you know everybody
knows their stories there. The point is
the channel in many instances will
already have the relationship with that
end customer. And so if they've already
written the contracts and they can just
add this as an addendum or slide it in
on an existing contract, you just took
all that friction out, reduced your cost
of selling and obviously are able to get
a multiplier in your business. So next
example would be in the product. Most
people think about products in a very
straightforward way uh as being, you
know, it's obvious that this is going to
be great value and therefore people
should want to buy it. That should be
the case, but you can get a lot smarter
than that. I'm going to introduce two
concepts to you tonight. Slippery
products. Yes, I said slippery. It's
another of my pneummonics. Um, which is
another way of saying frictionfree and
what I call Russian doll packaging. And
I think you'll have some fun with these
tonight when you get to the workshop. uh
but the last of which is technology
stacks and again I'll give you a simple
example of it and this is how you can
insert yourself into somebody else's
technology stack to get a multiplier out
of going to market with them. So let's
look at the levers. How do we take the
cost out? Well, the world has changed
dramatically since that 20-year-old
example I was telling you about at
semantic where we used to have to sell
through two-tier distribution and we
used to have to spiff salespeople at at
these ridiculously large distributors
that sold thousands of products and so
we had to get their attention. And now
you can get anybody's attention anytime
you want on the web and focus on doing
it in a very cost-effective way with
inbound marketing using inside sales for
example and creating things such as we
were talking about like viral campaigns
that dramatically takes down the cost of
selling a marketing that wasn't even an
option when I started this industry and
so I would use it and I would spend time
thinking right from the get-go about how
would you get your awareness your
interest your understanding up uh using
web and lowcost techniques like
And that's why I said this is one side
of the coin, the other side being go to
market that we'll talk about in the next
session. The second example is less
obvious and people typically think about
this too late in the game. So I'm
encouraging you to think about it right
up front which is how do you take the
cost out of producing your product,
creating your product and supporting it.
And there are many ways you can do this.
You can do it through offshoring or
outsourcing or crowd sourcing in that
example we talked about or something
called co-creation which I'm going to
give you an example of tonight and again
technology stacks. So probably a lot of
words up there. All I'll say is every
one of them can be thought of as a
potential lever. I don't think I need to
explain every one of them but I will
pick as I said co-creation to go into as
a differentiation.
And then here's the last piece of this
startup secret, which is you really want
to find examples of things that work
together. You've got a killer strategy
on your hands. If you can figure out how
you can get focused on your core, find a
partner to work with who will give you a
multiplier to market and a lever in
taking the cost out of uh either
building or delivering or supporting
your product. And so two examples of
that uh that I'd like to walk you
through now. First of all, one in
creating value, then another in
delivering and capturing
it. So, what is
co-creating? Well, the idea here is
pretty simple and it's going to come to
light in a software world, I think,
fairly easily. You could sit as a single
organization and build your product with
one development team. Or you could say,
what is at the core of our product? And
let's take an example that would make it
easy for everybody to think of.
Linux, it's an operating system, but at
the absolute core of Linux is literally
a kernel. And Linus thought about that
and realized that the problem with
existing operating systems was they've
got huge and bloated. And why they got
bloated? Because basically people had to
have different versions of them for
every single different kind of laptop or
PC or server and every kind of device
driver and everything else that went
associated along with it was yet another
piece that had to be added onto it. So
he wrote a brilliant call, super fast,
super efficient, but he made it possible
in a modular way for people to add onto
it using open source, created a
community, and got people thinking about
how could they extend the product. And
as a result of that, people like IBM,
who was literally at the time nowhere in
the operating system business, in fact,
you could argue was really struggling
with many different operating systems,
AS400, the Z series on the main frames,
etc. were able to take Linux and unify
their entire platform strategy with it
and they themselves using open APIs uh
and the open source nature of this were
able to write all the drivers for all of
their different products and get what
they needed which is a unified operating
system. What that did to Linux was
unbelievable. It literally accelerated,
actually I should have Carlos telling
the story since he's been involved in it
firsthand, but it literally accelerated
the adoption of a single operating
system that swept through the enterprise
very quickly because it was free, open-
source, and instantly much more uh
valuable to people as they were able to
focus on their differentiation and
people started building on top of it. So
that's an example and it's an open
source example. But if I jump to the top
and I give you just a little bit of
thinking around uh extensibility, this
is a simple concept. If you build
something that everybody wants to add
value to, needless to say, that's going
to multiply your value. I'm going to
start at the most basic level that you
can think of. Imagine you went to the
kitchen and you put on a a pot of
boiling water and you knew that
everybody wanted
soup. The first thing they're going to
need is the pot of boiling water. If
you're the only guy who's got the pot of
boiling water, people are going to come
to you and put the ingredients in. The
good news is they can add the stock to
start off with and if they decide, oh,
they want to add vegetables to that,
they could add vegetables, but maybe
some people don't want that. So, they'll
take a ladle out of it and they'll
create their own version derivative of
it and they'll add, you know, not
vegetables, but maybe meat to it because
that's the way they are. The next guy
comes along wants to add pasta to it.
The point is somebody thought about that
in a very basic way, and it's exactly
what I'd encourage you to do with your
product. They said, "What is the core
thing at the base of soup?" boiling
water. Think about your value prop in
that same way. And then think about how
easy would it be for people to come in
and take a label and take some out and
create their own version of it or add to
it. If you can find ways to do that,
that's why I love extensible open APIs
for software, for example, which is just
a fabulous way for people to do this.
And if you can do that really early on,
you'll be very successful. Here's the
next little detail but a super important
one. If you do it in a way that
internally you test that right away. So
in other words, let's say you're
building an application but the
application requires certain core
services like for example user input,
user validation and so forth. Why would
you write those as uh capabilities in
your platform that you had to build on
internally? So you had your team of apps
builders who know what the app
application logic should be but they
have to internally build on the APIs for
user validation user input user
experience etc. Immediately you're
creating a customer internally that is
testing your openness and your
extensibility of those APIs. And when I
see software companies who do that, they
build on themselves. I watch product
development go way way way quicker. And
I've seen it over and over again. Demand
where actually although Jamus can't talk
has done it superbly well internally.
They do exactly that with their
e-commerce application. Disagree. So
it's a small tip but it's a good
starting point. figure out how even
internally you can build around your
core and you can have customers uh from
you know one part of your organization
working on another piece of the
capability elsewhere. It's literally
eating your own cooking being your own
customer. Summarizing this I would say
as follows. You can get smart about
creation by thinking about who are all
the other people can contribute and if
you can find a way to actually incent
them to get value out of co-creating
with you, you're in a great starting
point. It's going to be both a lever in
terms of taking your cost down. It's
going to be a multiplier in terms of
those people obviously spreading the
word. Okay. Now, let's talk about
another example of levers and
multipliers in delivering and capturing
value. Uh delivering and capturing
value. Here is one which is pulled from
a list of 20 I could have talked about
which again is a favorite for me. It's
as simple as a strategic partnership and
yet it's as significant as to be a major
lever or multiplier for again almost
every software company I work with
figuring this out. And I'm going to give
you a specific example of what what
might make a great strategic partnership
where both levers and multipliers around
the core can make a difference. So if
you are a software company, you'll know
this without me telling you. You have to
figure out what are the key capabilities
that you're going to build around and it
always involves basic things like
compute and network and storage and
database. I could have added 20 things
in here. You probably don't have those
as distinctions unless you're a security
company or a database company. Um and
you want to go ultimately expose
applications and services at the top of
it. If your core capability can fit into
somebody else's stack right in the
middle and fill a gap for them. For
example, if you are able to be a load
balancer that enables people to scale
out and you do that on top of people's
database storage capabilities, then why
not fit into their stack? Why not go
build for their capabilities so that you
literally neatly can integrate and
create a much more fulfilled product
experience for anybody who's trying to
build applications at scale that need
load balancing. Well, obviously that's
what the opportunity is in a in a whole
product strategic partnership. And whole
product is a Jeffrey Moore term. As you
know, I'm a student of his. he'll be
here at the end of the series and it
really describes how you deliver a
complete solution to your customer. So
if you've only got a piece of it, you
can find partners, you've got the rest
of it. I would say this is a great
example of a multiplier that can work
for you. What happens when you do this
is best uh discovered described with an
example. Uh in one of the companies I
started in the analytics world, we had a
capability to do what we called real
time inline analytics. What the hell did
that mean? It meant that before that
point, everybody who was doing analytics
was typically getting reports, you know,
a week after things happened or maybe a
month after in some cases. And we said,
guess what? Before you even transact
with a customer, wouldn't it be helpful
to find out if they're a profitable
customer to deal with, what their
preferences are, what the things are
that they might also want to buy from
you. And that required real-time inline
analytics. But the trouble with that is
analytics is a tiny piece of the
challenge of getting that data putting
in a database uh cleaning it with what's
called ETL systems and then getting to a
place where you could actually do what
we did which was the real-time inline
analytics and then on top of that you
had all things people wanted to do with
them like present them and you know even
um analyze them further in Excel etc. So
we realized the big giant in this space
was IBM. So guess what? We did an
unbelievably obvious thing which was we
wrote right into the core of IBM stack
and made sure we worked better than
anybody else did with IBM's DB2 products
and also their web sphere products and
their middleware and also with their
tooling even. And the result was not
terribly surprising. We ended up getting
huge revenue uplift not just because
people were able to sell our products at
IBM but because it brought credibility
to us that IBM was actually partnering
with us and was taking our products to
market. It opened all the doors. And on
the other side of things, of course, it
dramatically reduced our time to market
because we weren't writing all their
technology around us and reduced our
development costs. Excuse me. And
ultimately resulted in them acquiring
the company, which in many instances, by
the way, even though it wasn't our
intention, is a great backs stop for a
small company to have had that strategic
partnership be so successful that you
know that if nothing else plays out in
your own, you know, ultimate success,
somebody's going to have you. so well
integrated they'd be a no-brainer for
them to acquire you. So I think
strategic partnerships and example being
a whole product strategic partnership
are great levers, great multipliers and
great back stops for for small
companies. One little detail and the
devil often is in the details and
certainly it's true with uh startup
companies. I hear people all the time
say, "Oh, it's fantastic. I've got this
new big company really interested in me
and they're going to co-sell
everything." Okay, who's incentive to
co-sell it? If they don't have their
salesforce incentive to do it, they
might be getting more advantage out of
you than you are out of them. There are
always details like that. It's really
worth paying attention to. If you get
them to resell it, might be great, but
if they suddenly bring you a thousand
customers and you've got all the support
cost, you might actually find you're
losing
money. Likewise, I often see small
companies make this mistake, too. They
go and write OEM deals and they think
they've got tremendous distribution
reach, but they've got no upsell
capabilities. They basically just gave
away the golden goose. Huge mistake. So,
here are some things you can do. The
first is actually a strategy not just to
OEM uh but also for in general helping
you with your product and how you get
multipliers and leverage out of them.
It's what I call building a Russian
doll. It's going to be very obvious, I
hope, where you might do this and then
I'm going to get uh one of our companies
come and talk about how they do this.
Come up with a version that's free.
Then find some way to give limited
access to it for a different price, some
upsell. Give a personal edition out once
it gets used by lots of people. Make a
workg groupoup edition. If lots of work
groups start using it, make a corporate
edition. Once it goes global, make an
enterprise edition. It isn't that hard.
But you'd be amazed how many times this
is the difference between, for example,
an OEM deal working or not. If you know
you've got all those additions and you
just do an OEM edition, for example, on
the personal edition or the workg
groupoup edition, you know, you can go
back and sell all the capabilities the
corporate edition or the enterprise
edition. And therefore, getting the
reach from the OEM made tremendous sense
because you can do the upsell, but don't
go in there without that in your back
pocket. Know up front what you're going
in there with. Know exactly up front
what you're going to do as an upsell.
And then to the point about going to
market in general, this strategy works
out for lots of other reasons. You'll
find that it's a great way of giving a
digestible starting point to people.
It's a great way of allowing people, as
I said, to taste a small piece of the
value. Uh, and if they if you can do
that free, that's a great strategy in
many instances. And then it gives you
all these upsell options. And it gives
you tremendous channel flexibility not
just with OEMs but you can go to for
example different channels for a
personal edition than you would for
example for an enterprise edition or you
can go to VA who want to build around
for example or systems integrators who
want to build around a very small piece
of your core functionality because they
want to differentiate with all the
capabilities they might bring in a
vertical market. Let's say they you go
to a VA for example that takes just the
core and takes it to to a medical market
and yet another one who takes the core
and goes after the financial market.
That's a great strategy that can play
out if you do Russian doll packaging. In
other words, if you figure out how to
get these capabilities, but if all you
come out with is one galactic edition,
which has everything for everybody in
every market, it's going to be really
hard for people to deal with you. And
you'll be again amazed how many times
the biggest problem when we see startups
is they try to put every feature for
every person into the first product. And
we all know that the result of that is
it usually collapses under its own
weight. So some of you will have read
Eric Reese's book on minimum viable
product. Minimum viable product is one
example of what I'm talking about. I'm
really talking about the business model
associated with it. That's the
technology piece. This is how do you
create the business flexibility around
it by packaging it in a way that you can
go to market in different ways. Okay.
I'd like to introduce a keeper now,
David McFarland, to give his example of
how he's created somewhat of a uh good
example not just in open source uh but
also with packaging different options
and giving himself this this uh
capability. David, you'd like to come
and join us.
So um uh just an opportunity to maybe
walk you through how we've actually uh
taken several of these capabilities and
combined them in this uh uh in this uh
go to market strategy. Just a reminder,
some of you may know from the prior
meetings, but at the very core of what
Keem does, what our keep our secret
sources, and it was this man in the
middle here who invented it, uh, is
something we call table grouping. Simply
put, we understand how an application
uses data, and then we group that data
together, and the net result is that
transactions and queries run 10 to 100
times faster. It's a huge breakthrough
uh, in terms of capability. So, what
we've done is that we've taken that core
capability and we've released that as an
open-source product. The idea is to
drive as much viral business as
possible. It's developers who drive
these technology decisions. It's the
developers that is the 10,000 100,000
strong uh salesforce that we can use to
compete with the likes of Oracles. What
we've also done is allowed those
developer communities to extend our
product by integrating it into uh their
uh own development environment. So for
for Ruby and Hibernate, we integrate
into their environment. So it becomes a
value ad to their stack and again they
drive it through their own distribution
and they own that value and they drive
that value. But what we did is we
created a pluggable architecture and as
a pluggable architecture it means that
we can add critical additional
components that will add unique value to
the product. So the first is something
we call my SQL replication. It just
means that you can take this and now
plug it into a pre-existing MySQL
application. If you built something on
the LAMP stack, it's not scaling well,
it's running slowly, you can take this
aon stack, plug it in, redirect the
queries, uh, and we'll run those queries
really quickly for you. And that's just
one example, but the key point here is
to have a whole series of these
capabilities that you can add and extend
the product with, which is what we've
done. And you can also use that in terms
of a multi-ter pricing strategy. And
then finally, as you build community out
there in the market, we've added a
series of electronic services that you
can add, things that you can deliver as
a SAS capability back out to that
market. It makes it easy for them to
adopt, but it also kind of locks them in
to your service and your brand. And even
within those uh additions, there are
certain community aspects like the
grouping algorithms. You get lots of
people to combine together to contribute
to different grouping strategies that
then can be shared across the community.
So those are just some of the examples
of how we extend it. Perfect. Thank you,
David. And I'll just leave that up for
one second. I think he's used pretty
much every example that I've already
said tonight. There's effectively a core
that is very clearly defined. And he's
actually made it open source so people
can extend it. And he's also said, look,
we're going to have several additions in
that Russian gold model. So we can sell
this through many different channels and
sell different capabilities. And he's
also said, we're going to have upsell
and cross-ell capabilities from that.
And in effect, he's got cost being taken
out through open source and co-creation.
He's got multipliers being created
obviously through the community and he's
got obviously multiple options uh
through the Russian build packaging. So
it it's a great example and I can tell
you that would it be fair to say well
you tell me I shouldn't need the
witness. Have how much time have you
spent on the business model as a CEO
relative to other things in your
business like building the product?
Well, the one thing I would say is like,
you know, from the very inception of the
product, we had these ideas in mind. So,
one of the things that was very
important that I would say to people is
that you really want to think about how
you're going to package this value up
and deliver it to the market. It isn't
necessarily that it was hugely
timeconuming for us to do that, but it
was really important that you think
about it right up front and you don't
wait to the end of the development cycle
to apply it. That's a terrific point.
What David's saying just to underline it
is if you develop the product in a
monolithic fashion then obviously going
to be really hard if you later decide
you want to slice it up and sell it in
different ways. So thinking about the
business model as early as you're
starting your product development is
actually not too early. It's exactly
right. So thank you David. Great point
David.
Okay. Apple made a launch today. No
Steve Jobs. So I'm going to have to do
as the poor substitute. One more thing
and actually I think it's a really
fundamental thing. There is actually a
tendency for people to think about these
things i.e. business models as
snapshots. Uh but in fact what you
really want to do is think about on an
ongoing basis. How is it your product or
service is sold? And so I'm going to
take you through a series of things that
will give you a sense of the product
life cycle. And it starts with something
that I've always really enjoyed watching
companies who get it right do. And that
is creating what I call slippery
products.
When I told my daughter this, she said,
"Dad, what have slippers got to do with
products?" Kind of missed the point, but
anyway, we'll see if we can get it
across tonight. Okay. Uh, the first
thing is creating a product that is
simple to use. Obviously, the simpler it
is, the more likely it is for people to
instantly get it. The second is low to
no initial cost. That takes more
friction out of it. The third is
installs easily. You'd be shocked how
many times, even if something's free as
an app on your iPhone, think about it.
If it takes a while for you to install
it and it actually isn't immediately
functional, it doesn't have some
component or it doesn't fill in too much
data or whatever it is to get it going,
you're not going to use it. And then how
does it prove its value really quickly?
If it instantly delivers something back
to you before you have to put a lot of
stuff into it, you're going to start
using it. Next on the list is obviously,
does it play well with others? In the
enterprise, this is incredibly important
because if it disrupts everything, even
if it's free and it's incredibly easy to
use and you're getting value from it,
but you have to replace everything
before you can use that, it's going to
be really
tough. Next is obviously ease of use.
But I say this and yet it's amazing how
many people spend zero time up front
thinking about user experience. The user
experience is everything. It's usually
what dep describes obviously defines
excuse me how often it gets used, how it
gets circulated and so forth. And so pay
attention to that up front. From a
business standpoint, we've been talking
about this. The customer is going to
look at payback and ROI. And so make it
obvious. Make it obvious right up front
why this pays for itself, why it
justifies itself. In the end, my
favorite one is the why. Why not? Why
customers can't live without this should
be what they should be thinking. Not why
might they try it, but why can they
literally not live without it? That's
back to that gain pain equation. For
those of you who are here, if you give
them so much gain and there's no pain
because it's so slippery, friction free
to adopt this product, they're going to
buy it. So I would actually say one of
the most important elements of the
business model is in fact creating
slippery products. It's creating
friction-free products. And oftentimes
people say, well, R&D's got nothing to
do with the business model. I say it's
got a ton to do with it. We just talked
about one example which David gave,
which is about how you chunk it up. But
actually, if you right from the get-go
figure out what your business model is
and you decide to create a slippery
product, you can take a ton of the
friction, in other words, the cost out
of marketing, distribution, sales,
service, and support. So, it's worth
taking that thought really early on into
your thinking as you define your
business
model. And to help bring this to life,
I'm going to introduce Mark Taber, our
CEO from Active Endpoints. And as Mark
comes up, I'm going to tell you a little
bit of story to set him up because uh I
actually inherited this investment and
that's never an easy thing when you're a
partner in a venture firm. Um I didn't
inherit Mark. I was lucky enough to go
recruit him. But uh it was a middleware
product. It was a tiny piece of a
product actually. They had something
called a Beetle engine. Yeah. You don't
need to know what that is. I'll just
tell you it was a feature. Uh, and so it
wasn't even a whole product. And Mark
came on and the first thing he said to
me when we were we're going through
recruiting is, I don't want to talk to
you about the product. I want to talk to
you about the business model. I've got a
vision for how I could take this thing
to market in and he didn't use the word
slippery although I think I've coaxed
him into using it now uh way. And it's
turned out that he's figured out how to
sell complex very difficult stuff to
sell anyway in any more way uh in an
exciting way. typically selling, you
know, something of of the order of tens
or hundreds of thousands of dollars
worth of value over the phone. This is a
company that's doing millions of dollars
of revenue, has has literally been
growing at at phenomenal rates every
year without having a single outside
salesperson. Extraordinary. So Mark, how
did you do that? Yeah. So in actuality,
we we did structure the whole company
out of this concept of making it simple
and how we bring it to market. process
automation, which is what we do, it's
been around for a long time. Business
process management, the corporate IT
people have been, you know, able to
accomplish things for their users for a
long time, but it's it's way too hard.
And so the concept of active endpoints
has been how can we enable the business
user to make their life simpler by doing
these things themselves. And so the
example that I that I've shown here is
how can we make the life of a
salesperson easier. They interact with
an application. Most of them use
something called Salesforce.com which is
really just a database to collect
information. But salespeople don't want
to write reports. They they don't want
to gather the information. And because
of that, they frequently miss common
things that they that they know they
should do, but they just forget and and
they don't do it consistently over time.
So what we did was we invented some
technology to allow a business user to
do their own automation. So in fact you
could use a mobile phone and the
texttospech
uh capability speech to text capability
that is for example in an iPhone using
Siri you can talk into the phone say
show me my meetings today. A guide will
come up and you can just speak into it
what happened at the meeting. You can
hit a button if you want a thank you
email to go out or whatever whatever it
is you normally do after a meeting. if
you want to set up a follow-up or
something like that, it will
automatically happen in the background.
And so this this is it's great in the
fact that we've done it, but the real
innovation is the fact that we allow the
business user to do it themselves. And
so we took that concept and really our
entire go to market really everything
about the technology and what we do
encompasses this comp, you know, this
concept of slippery, though I didn't
know the acronym until yesterday,
Michael. Uh but you know it
was but it but it's exactly what it's
exactly what we do. We tried to make
this this product as easy to use as
possible. We tried to make it as
frictionless as possible. So in fact you
could just go to our website you can
just enable yourself. You can try it.
You can use it. You can interact it. You
interact with it. You can get a free
version of it uh to use. I have Eric
Edggerson our head of sales. Maybe you
want to share like a you know how some
of our customers are doing that. Sure.
Sure. Mark, I'll just u mention one
customer. Plymouth Rock Energy down in
the New York City area. Traditionally
had been an old line supplier of coal
and oil to large facilities. That
business isn't such a great business
anymore. So they've transformed
themselves into a broker of energy
including electricity and natural gas.
Uh and they use Salesforce.com for all
of their new customer signups. So they
had to customize Salesforce.com
tremendously. Uh when you sign up a new
customer as an energy broker, you have
to specify the supplier, who the
distribution channel is going to be,
whether they're going to pay a premium
for green energy sources. Uh and it
turned out for the Salesforce.com users,
the sales rep signing up a new uh
customer, it was a very complex process.
They had to go through the Salesforce
screens. So we met a gentleman down at a
Salesforce.com
um event in New York City on a
Wednesday. The following Monday, we gave
him a demo via a go to meeting, via a
web meeting. Uh he was able to get on
our cloud hosted product, uh started
building his little process wizard the
next day that his sales reps could use
uh to go through this complex process of
onboarding a new customer. Uh by the end
of the week, he had it working and the
following Monday placed the order with
us. So, you know, going back to some of
the points, you can probably map what
happened there into these points, but
installs easily. He was able to sign up
on the web. could prove value in just a
couple of days by creating a wizard that
walked their users through these complex
um processes. And what else do I want to
say? Plays well with others. Having the
Salesforce.com integration has been
tremendously valuable to us, Michael. I
would call it both a lever because it
reduces our marketing cost tremendously.
We know who our market is and we're able
to get to them through Salesforce and
it's a multiplier um because uh we're
able to increase revenue by selling
users. Last one was we sell it per user
per month. The guy was concerned he's
only going to have 15 users to start
out. We said that's fine. You can buy 15
user license. When you add 10 more next
year, you just buy 10 more licenses.
Great. Thank you guys very much. And I
think you know you can pick lots of
companies. The the reason I chose active
endpoints is it would be a horribly
complex sale normally to be able to sell
middleware. And all of their competitors
by the way, people like IBM are going in
with three-legged sales sorry three
person sales calls. Six-legged sales
calls hopefully. uh and they're spending
a lot of money and they're having as a
result to charge orders of magnitude in
some cases more for their products and
services. And this company has taken
market share away on a consistent basis
been doubling year on year in some cases
in in their product sales through this
slippery product concept. And thanks to
the team for being so innovative
approaching it that way where we're at
the technology at the core of it. It's
interesting but in a very highly
competitive
market. So let's put it all together. Um
I want to give you a a very clear metric
which you've probably seen. If you
haven't, you certainly should know about
and that is this notion of coming um up
with an understanding of if your
business model is working or not. And
for startups, the metric that people now
are getting used to is lifetime value.
That is how can you how much can you get
from a customer over the lifetime of
working with them divided by the cost of
acquiring that customer. And in general,
if your lifetime value from a customer
isn't around three or greater the time
times the cost of acquiring that
customer, you probably don't have a
profitable business model. And
unfortunately in startups, most times
people don't really spend time to think
about this up front either. But all the
multipliers and levers that I talk to
you about should be factored into what
is it that you're doing to obviously
increase on the one hand the lifetime
value. How can you get more out of
customers over time with for example
that Russian doll packaging we're
talking about more and more versions or
additions or in reducing the cost of
acquiring the customer in the ways we
just talked about with things like
strategic partnerships and there are
many examples um that I didn't go
through like channels and so forth that
can give you reach and take cost out
too. In the end though, when you boil it
all down, you should find that this
ratio plays out, as I said, to roughly
three or more times uh value, the value
you're capturing than the cost you're
implying uh to get that customer
successful. Now, that model's been, I'd
say, pretty successfully adopted by many
of my customers, but I noticed something
over the last few years as it's become
accepted that's been missing. And so I
want to introduce this because what we
found is almost every startup just as
you heard Eric describe gets in at one
point and then has a relationship to
maintain the customer to get the full
value. And I find most people ignore
that latter set of re-engagement with
the customer. So I'm going to give you a
sense of what you really need to think
through. This refinement to me to keep
it interesting is a matter of life and
death.
I'm going to talk about a customer life
cycle in a very simple methodology to
start off with. See, try
buy. Think about it for a second. That's
basically what happens when you look for
products. You see it, you try it, you
buy it, you run it, fly, and ultimately
it dies some kind of death. And that
cycle is typically described by people
in this kind of a bell curve. And the
problem with it, at least in the
software business and many B2B
businesses, is if it really looks like
this, you have a long costly customer
acquisition cost, a slow payback period,
and very short lifetime value. And if
that's really what your business model
looks like, in my opinion, you're in
trouble. And unfortunately, it's what a
lot of startups I see exactly have as a
business model. And so, I'm going to try
to help you think about ways that you
could get beyond that.
We'll talk about this more in the go to
market session next week. But one of the
first things u I always see when I do
postmortems with companies is that they
haven't broken these stages down from
the simplistic C drive by fly model that
I talked to you about into much more
granular stages. And granular stages
just to give you an example of this
would be awareness. How do you even
discover somebody interest? How do you
get their interest? How do you get them
to understand what your capabilities
are? Then engage with you then try it.
Then purchase it. And I could go I could
probably pick 30 or 40 more if I really
wanted to break it down. We'll talk
about more of this as I said next week.
But just for now, think about this as
follows. Once I've bought the product,
how do I stay engaged with you? What is
it that I do to repurchase? So, I'm
going to introduce an obvious constant
obvious idea here, and that is how do
you re-engage the customer after they've
bought? How do you actually get them to
retry the next capability that you
introduce? either the upgrade or the
update or the whole new version that you
just came out with. So in this cycle of
re-engagement and repurchasing it, there
are a lot of steps that are basically
the same as you did when you first
introduced the product or connect with
the customer. And if you get them right,
it turns out you really dramatically
change the cycle. In fact, what you
really want to do is of course have the
cycle occurring over and over again.
customer keeps coming back to you as
your preferred supplier or as your
trusted source as or as a person where
they'll buy the next set of
capabilities. And if you can do that
successfully, what you'll find you can
do is dramatically extend the life cycle
of the customer. Uh and if you use
things like slippery products that we
just talked about, you'll have a much
more um simple experience up front and
take all the friction out. you'll have a
much rapid more rapid adoption with that
Russian gold packaging as an example of
how you might do that. And then very
importantly, you'll have a much extended
life cycle because you'll find ways to
re-engage the customer over and over
again. So, it's a lot to take in. And
what I felt like I should do is give you
an example of how actually you can avoid
the death that happens here uh in the
software world with an example of
exactly this. So how are you going to
have uh a long happy life is is really
the question in the software world. Well
when I started out as I said I'm dating
myself it was the only person who
installed stuff they were the only
people who customized it. There were
infrequent upgrades. Most of the stuff
actually sat on shelfware as we called
it. It was all proprietary and people
licensed it on a perpetual basis. The
poster child for this probably would
have been Oracle uh quite frankly. Um,
but it's all changed. And in fact, if
you use all the techniques we've just
said, what you can use is the web to
make it easy for people to trial stuff.
You can then make it easily uh
self-service as you just heard, you
know, Eric give that example. The
customer didn't have to come in for
training or figure out how to configure
or install the thing. They were just
using it on the web live trying it in
their own situation. It can be on
demand, so there's absolutely nothing
for them to actually buy initially. It
can be available literally over the
cloud. And software as a service is very
much the post child for that. And
obviously if you make it open source or
extensible in some way they can extend
it or add to those capabilities
themselves. And ultimately through a
subscription model they can buy it as
they need it and pay for it as they use
it. The result of all of that is what
this extended life cycle. It creates
this incredibly easy basis for people to
try things adopt them and then buy them
as they need them. and then on a
subscription basis keep reusing them and
underneath it the engine for it is very
important for you to think about which
is how do you keep engaging the customer
and I'll say again what I obvious often
observe with startups is they think
they've got the customer and they think
that just continuing to introduce new
innovations is the answer maybe u you
might have that kind of customer but how
many times have you downloaded an iPhone
app recently for example and then never
used it
again show of hands
Okay, a lot of you. That's exactly what
I mean by this green circle. I will tell
you that that's a big problem for mobile
app developers and it's just a bigger
problem for almost every example of
software in B2B or or other worlds too.
So, you really got to think about this
blue circles I put up there, this notion
of acquiring, not just acquiring, but
re-engaging customers. So, let's bring
that back to the the um the model that I
said earlier and just add that extra
layer. What this is about is not just
the levers and multipliers around your
core but also thinking about how you not
just acquire the customer but re-engage
them and continuously stay in touch with
them so that you don't get that iPhone
app dying but in fact you find some way
to to reconnect with them. It might be a
new map that you send them out if it's
GPS or it might be some new set of
content that you send them out if it's a
recommendation service or it might be
some new data that you send them out
that makes it obvious for them how they
can connect if it's a dating
application. Those things turn out to be
the difference between products that
have long life cycles that engage the
customers that get more lifetime value
out of them than anything else. And so I
reinvented that acronym and called it
customer cost of customer acquisition
and re-engagement. It's the R there. And
instead of it being lifetime value, it's
life cycle value. That's the L, the C in
there. And it really is important to
think about LCV, the life cycle value of
your customer. what can you get out of
them over and over again, not just once.
Uh and also what does it cost you to
re-engage? So when I describe this to
startups, I find that most people have
uh challenges initially getting what do
I mean by those kinds of things. So
here's an
example. Re-engagement costs are
typically things like support. Support
should absolutely be factored into it.
It's not just sales and marketing.
Keeping your customers often involves
customer service. And if you're in a B2B
environment and you're selling anything
like a complex product, it often
involves professional services. So all
of those costs should be factored in to
the the CAC, the cost of acquiring and
re-engaging
customers. Any questions before I move
on? We're nearly at the end. So to get
you to your workshop. Okay. So now you
have a model which I think is really
quite compelling to be able to work with
things. And for those of you who were
here when we talked through the value
proposition on gain pain, it also is
exactly the same concept and principle
as we talked about in gain pain. They're
just two views of the same problem. For
those of you were there for this
workshop, we talked about how could you
take the pain out of a customer getting
to grips with your product and give them
all visibility into the game. Well,
think about it for a second. That is how
the customer will view it. What you're
going to view on the other side is the
measurement of how much cost is it
taking for you to actually get the
customer to adopt the product. That's
the CC. And how much can you get from
that customer as they get those gains
over time throughout that life cycle.
That's the LCB. So they're just two
sides of the same principle. And they
work around this whole notion of the
core of your value proposition. So good
business models, you will constantly be
going back. I can I could make this
single template a basis for discussion
in every startup. What have we done to
take the pain out? How is that reducing
our cost of acquiring the customer? What
have we done to make it obvious to the
customer what gain they get right up
front? How can we make that work over
time to be a very large lifetime value,
life cycle value of a
customer? So with that, I'm going to
summarize and get us onto our workshop.
I have a question. I guess I um I was it
was unclear to me the concept around the
Russian goals. Um is the message that it
you're recommending to have various
versions of of a product a single user
or small business and enterprise or I
guess the counter for that is what
happens if your product is only geared
towards enterprise large companies and
you know a a single individual average
customer wouldn't have much value out of
that. Am I missing something? No, you're
not. You've actually got a great example
to challenge me on. So if your product
just to repeat the question, does the
Russian bull strategy work? For example,
if you've got a product that's only
valuable if you sell it to an entire
enterprise fairly, the answer is yes, I
believe it does because very rarely will
you be able to get an entire enterprise
to adopt a product in one go. It's just
indigestible. I mean, I've made this
mistake as a young entrepreneur. I've
tried to go sell people like FISA an
entire salesforce package for analytics
and say, "Hey, why don't you buy this
whole thing because your entire sales
force will get value out of it if you
can all see all the data on all the
products yourself." It's not going to
work because it's so difficult to get a
big enterprise to adopt any change. You
have huge pain in doing that and it's
going to take you months in a sales
cycle and you're going to spend a lot of
money doing it. But even though the
value might be the whole sales force, if
you gave them something right off the
bat, which is look, here is some data on
the benchmark of just one of your sales
teams, maybe even, you know, a small
region for example, of how they're
relatively performing in terms of their
sales effectiveness. That's immediately
valuable to them and that small team can
adopt it very quickly. If that team sees
success with it, they'll recommend it
elsewhere. And pretty soon you'll get
obviously largest regions will hopefully
hold groups divisions or theaters as
they call them large companies adopting.
So the reason I always think about it is
that it's all down to the same paying
game equation. You got to take the
upfront cost out of getting that
customer and you got to make it really
digestible and easy for the customer. So
if you don't want to call it Russian
doll, you want to call it, you know,
chunking up the elephant, I don't care.
The point is find digestible ways to get
that first intro introduction to your
customer to be as painless and slippery
as possible. Um, and then obviously it's
it's a great product that you can keep
re-engaging and that's why this piece is
so critical. You can keep re-engaging
them, adding more value, opening up more
and more of the the uh the dolls if you
will, exposing more value, then you will
get more and more lifetime value out of
that customer. Does that answer your
question? Yeah, it's it sounds like it's
a way to also gradually build your
credibility. Absolutely.
It's absolutely the biggest challenge
startups have and it's amazing how many
times we struggle this is just that one
word you use credibility and I think I
mentioned it on one of my slides often
times a strategic partnership is at the
top of the list providing a company
credibility uh an example from our
portfolio just to give people another
real world case study was we had a a
great entrepreneur we backed him again
actually Ashtosh in a storage world came
up with a concept in a company called um
app IQ to make it possible for people to
store data independent of the underlying
uh infrastructure. So in other words,
you matter whether you know storage from
IBM or EMC or Fuji or whatever. Uh the
application above could use that like
storage in a less cost effective manner.
It's a brilliant idea. But the problem
is applications are mission critical
storage is sold by big companies.
There's only about five of them in the
world who who own that marketplace. And
how the heck was a little company going
to get in the middle of those two
things? He did a genius thing and found
a way to make it possible for that to
become effectively very simple for
people, painless for people to try and
then he went and did a deal with one of
the major vendors and then it made it
obvious that all the other four needed
to play otherwise they wouldn't be
competitive and pretty soon he owned
that marketplace and had a great exit
and ended up being CTO of storage at HP
and now we're back in his latest startup
activity and he's doing it all over
again. uh but he really understands this
very very well. Maybe I'll get up to one
of the workshops. Does that answer your
question? Thank you. Any other questions
from people before we summarize
here? Okay. So, as you go after your
workshop, what I want to try to get you
thinking about is what is your
disruptive model going to be? How can
you make it as significant as your
technology? Can you focus on a core
differentiation? Not 20 things that you
do, but hopefully one. and what will be
the multipliers and leverage that you
will give it with innovations like we've
talked about this evening co-creation or
strategic partners uh or Russian gold
packaging or slippery products and then
how will you measure that not just once
but over the extended customer life
cycle with LCB and CC.
So I I hope everybody had some fun this
evening. I I must say I continue to be
blown away by what a great group this is
because if you look at some of the
things we were trying to do and we were
trying to figure out you know could you
come up with a core value problem. A
number of you took some pretty bold
moves to not declare it as the obvious
thing the technology but you focused on
things like data or data and analytics
or content in one case. You were quick
to figure out what your multipliers and
your levers were. Some of you found some
really great ways to make partnerships
that were win-win that would work on
both sides of of that. So multipliers
and levers and then a lot of you were
talking very clearly about just as you
heard how important the slippery product
concept is to make it easy for people to
get instant value out of this and and
instantly they're obviously start
spinning the wheel. Um, a few people
definitely picked up on this life cycle
concept and this notion of keeping
people engaged and I heard some good
examples of that. And overall, although
we didn't try to get you down to, you
know, actually calculating your uh, life
cycle value and your customer
acquisition and re-engagement cost, I
felt like a lot of you grasped this so
well that you would have no problem
doing those kinds of things. So, I want
to take my hats off to all of you and
say congratulations. Thank you.
[Music]